specs/_features/eip6800/fork.md, before:

# EIP-6800 -- Fork Logic

*Note*: This document is a work-in-progress for researchers and implementers.

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Fork to eip6800](#fork-to-eip6800)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of the eip6800 upgrade.

## Configuration

Warning: this configuration is not definitive.

| Name                   | Value                                 |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `EIP6800_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x05000000')`               |
| `EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(18446744073709551615)` **TBD** |

## Fork to eip6800

### Fork trigger

The fork is triggered at epoch `EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH`.

Note that for the pure eip6800 networks, we don't apply `upgrade_to_eip6800`
since it starts with the eip6800 version logic.

### Upgrading the state

If `state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0` and
`compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot) == EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH`, an irregular state
change is made to upgrade to eip6800.

The upgrade occurs after the completion of the inner loop of `process_slots`
that sets `state.slot` equal to `EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH`. Care
must be taken when transitioning through the fork boundary as implementations
will need a modified
[state transition function](../../phase0/beacon-chain.md#beacon-chain-state-transition-function)
that deviates from the Phase 0 document. In particular, the outer
`state_transition` function defined in the Phase 0 document will not expose the
precise fork slot to execute the upgrade in the presence of skipped slots at the
fork boundary. Instead, the logic must be within `process_slots`.

```python
def upgrade_to_eip6800(pre: deneb.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = capella.get_current_epoch(pre)
    latest_execution_payload_header = ExecutionPayloadHeader(
        parent_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.parent_hash,
        fee_recipient=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.fee_recipient,
        state_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.state_root,
        receipts_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.receipts_root,
        logs_bloom=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.logs_bloom,
        prev_randao=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.prev_randao,
        block_number=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_number,
        gas_limit=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_limit,
        gas_used=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_used,
        timestamp=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.timestamp,
        extra_data=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.extra_data,
        base_fee_per_gas=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.base_fee_per_gas,
        excess_data_gas=uint256(0),
        block_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash,
        transactions_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.transactions_root,
        withdrawals_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.withdrawals_root,
        # [New in EIP6800]
        execution_witness_root=hash_tree_root(ExecutionWitness([], [])),
    )
    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [Modified in EIP6800]
            current_version=EIP6800_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        latest_execution_payload_header=latest_execution_payload_header,
        next_withdrawal_index=pre.next_withdrawal_index,
        next_withdrawal_validator_index=pre.next_withdrawal_validator_index,
        historical_summaries=pre.historical_summaries,
    )

    return post
```

Commit message:

updated testnet genesis state descriptions

specs/_features/eip6800/fork.md, after:

# EIP-6800 -- Fork Logic

*Note*: This document is a work-in-progress for researchers and implementers.

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Fork to eip6800](#fork-to-eip6800)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of the eip6800 upgrade.

## Configuration

Warning: this configuration is not definitive.

| Name                   | Value                                 |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `EIP6800_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x05000000')`               |
| `EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(18446744073709551615)` **TBD** |

## Fork to eip6800

### Fork trigger

The fork is triggered at epoch `EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH`.

*Note*: For the pure eip6800 networks, the `upgrade_to_eip6800` function is
applied to transition the genesis state to this fork.

### Upgrading the state

If `state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0` and
`compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot) == EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH`, an irregular state
change is made to upgrade to eip6800.

The upgrade occurs after the completion of the inner loop of `process_slots`
that sets `state.slot` equal to `EIP6800_FORK_EPOCH * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH`. Care
must be taken when transitioning through the fork boundary as implementations
will need a modified
[state transition function](../../phase0/beacon-chain.md#beacon-chain-state-transition-function)
that deviates from the Phase 0 document. In particular, the outer
`state_transition` function defined in the Phase 0 document will not expose the
precise fork slot to execute the upgrade in the presence of skipped slots at the
fork boundary. Instead, the logic must be within `process_slots`.

```python
def upgrade_to_eip6800(pre: deneb.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = capella.get_current_epoch(pre)
    latest_execution_payload_header = ExecutionPayloadHeader(
        parent_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.parent_hash,
        fee_recipient=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.fee_recipient,
        state_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.state_root,
        receipts_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.receipts_root,
        logs_bloom=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.logs_bloom,
        prev_randao=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.prev_randao,
        block_number=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_number,
        gas_limit=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_limit,
        gas_used=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_used,
        timestamp=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.timestamp,
        extra_data=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.extra_data,
        base_fee_per_gas=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.base_fee_per_gas,
        excess_data_gas=uint256(0),
        block_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash,
        transactions_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.transactions_root,
        withdrawals_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.withdrawals_root,
        # [New in EIP6800]
        execution_witness_root=hash_tree_root(ExecutionWitness([], [])),
    )
    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [Modified in EIP6800]
            current_version=EIP6800_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        latest_execution_payload_header=latest_execution_payload_header,
        next_withdrawal_index=pre.next_withdrawal_index,
        next_withdrawal_validator_index=pre.next_withdrawal_validator_index,
        historical_summaries=pre.historical_summaries,
    )

    return post
```
