specs/bellatrix/fork.md, before:

# Bellatrix -- Fork Logic

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Fork to Bellatrix](#fork-to-bellatrix)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of Bellatrix upgrade.

## Configuration

| Name                     | Value                                          |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x02000000')`                        |
| `BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(144896)` (Sept 6, 2022, 11:34:47am UTC) |

## Fork to Bellatrix

### Fork trigger

TBD. Social consensus, along with state conditions such as epoch boundary,
finality, deposits, active validator count, etc. may be part of the decision
process to trigger the fork. For now we assume the condition will be triggered
at epoch `BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH`.

Note that for the pure Bellatrix networks, we don't apply `upgrade_to_bellatrix`
since it starts with Bellatrix version logic.

### Upgrading the state

As with the Phase0-to-Altair upgrade, the `state_transition` is modified to
upgrade the `BeaconState`. The `BeaconState` upgrade runs as part of
`process_slots`, slots with missing block proposals do not affect the upgrade
time.

If `state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0` and
`compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot) == BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH`, an irregular state
change is made to upgrade to Bellatrix. The upgrade occurs after the completion
of the inner loop of `process_slots` that sets `state.slot` equal to
`BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH`.

When multiple upgrades are scheduled for the same epoch (common for
test-networks), all the upgrades run in sequence before resuming the regular
state transition.

```python
def upgrade_to_bellatrix(pre: altair.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = altair.get_current_epoch(pre)
    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [New in Bellatrix]
            current_version=BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        # [New in Bellatrix]
        latest_execution_payload_header=ExecutionPayloadHeader(),
    )

    return post
```

Commit message:

Update testnet genesis state descriptions (#4727)
Updated documentation comments in fork documents about
`upgrade_to_<fork>` function usage.

Fixes #4720

specs/bellatrix/fork.md, after:

# Bellatrix -- Fork Logic

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Fork to Bellatrix](#fork-to-bellatrix)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of Bellatrix upgrade.

## Configuration

| Name                     | Value                                          |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x02000000')`                        |
| `BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(144896)` (Sept 6, 2022, 11:34:47am UTC) |

## Fork to Bellatrix

### Fork trigger

TBD. Social consensus, along with state conditions such as epoch boundary,
finality, deposits, active validator count, etc. may be part of the decision
process to trigger the fork. For now we assume the condition will be triggered
at epoch `BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH`.

*Note*: For the pure Bellatrix networks, the `upgrade_to_bellatrix` function is
applied to transition the genesis state to this fork.

### Upgrading the state

As with the Phase0-to-Altair upgrade, the `state_transition` is modified to
upgrade the `BeaconState`. The `BeaconState` upgrade runs as part of
`process_slots`, slots with missing block proposals do not affect the upgrade
time.

If `state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0` and
`compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot) == BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH`, an irregular state
change is made to upgrade to Bellatrix. The upgrade occurs after the completion
of the inner loop of `process_slots` that sets `state.slot` equal to
`BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH`.

When multiple upgrades are scheduled for the same epoch (common for
test-networks), all the upgrades run in sequence before resuming the regular
state transition.

```python
def upgrade_to_bellatrix(pre: altair.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = altair.get_current_epoch(pre)
    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [New in Bellatrix]
            current_version=BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        # [New in Bellatrix]
        latest_execution_payload_header=ExecutionPayloadHeader(),
    )

    return post
```
