specs/electra/validator.md, before:

# Electra -- Honest Validator

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Helpers](#helpers)
  - [Modified `GetPayloadResponse`](#modified-getpayloadresponse)
- [Containers](#containers)
  - [Modified containers](#modified-containers)
    - [`AggregateAndProof`](#aggregateandproof)
    - [`SignedAggregateAndProof`](#signedaggregateandproof)
- [Protocols](#protocols)
  - [`ExecutionEngine`](#executionengine)
    - [Modified `get_payload`](#modified-get_payload)
- [Block proposal](#block-proposal)
  - [Constructing the `BeaconBlockBody`](#constructing-the-beaconblockbody)
    - [Attester slashings](#attester-slashings)
    - [Attestations](#attestations)
    - [Deposits](#deposits)
    - [Execution payload](#execution-payload)
    - [Execution Requests](#execution-requests)
  - [Constructing the `BlobSidecar`s](#constructing-the-blobsidecars)
    - [Sidecar](#sidecar)
- [Attesting](#attesting)
  - [Construct attestation](#construct-attestation)
- [Attestation aggregation](#attestation-aggregation)
  - [Construct aggregate](#construct-aggregate)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document represents the changes to be made in the code of an "honest
validator" to implement Electra.

## Prerequisites

This document is an extension of the
[Deneb -- Honest Validator](../deneb/validator.md) guide. All behaviors and
definitions defined in this document, and documents it extends, carry over
unless explicitly noted or overridden.

All terminology, constants, functions, and protocol mechanics defined in the
updated Beacon Chain doc of [Electra](./beacon-chain.md) are requisite for this
document and used throughout. Please see related Beacon Chain doc before
continuing and use them as a reference throughout.

## Helpers

### Modified `GetPayloadResponse`

```python
@dataclass
class GetPayloadResponse(object):
    execution_payload: ExecutionPayload
    block_value: uint256
    blobs_bundle: BlobsBundle
    # [New in Electra]
    execution_requests: Sequence[bytes]
```

## Containers

### Modified containers

#### `AggregateAndProof`

```python
class AggregateAndProof(Container):
    aggregator_index: ValidatorIndex
    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    aggregate: Attestation
    selection_proof: BLSSignature
```

#### `SignedAggregateAndProof`

```python
class SignedAggregateAndProof(Container):
    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    message: AggregateAndProof
    signature: BLSSignature
```

## Protocols

### `ExecutionEngine`

#### Modified `get_payload`

Given the `payload_id`, `get_payload` returns the most recent version of the
execution payload that has been built since the corresponding call to
`notify_forkchoice_updated` method.

```python
def get_payload(self: ExecutionEngine, payload_id: PayloadId) -> GetPayloadResponse:
    """
    Return ExecutionPayload, uint256, BlobsBundle and execution requests (as Sequence[bytes]) objects.
    """
    # pylint: disable=unused-argument
    ...
```

## Block proposal

### Constructing the `BeaconBlockBody`

#### Attester slashings

Changed the max attester slashings size to `MAX_ATTESTER_SLASHINGS_ELECTRA`.

#### Attestations

Changed the max attestations size to `MAX_ATTESTATIONS_ELECTRA`.

The network attestation aggregates contain only the assigned committee
attestations. Attestation aggregates received by the block proposer from the
committee aggregators with disjoint `committee_bits` sets and equal
`AttestationData` SHOULD be consolidated into a single `Attestation` object. The
proposer should run the following function to construct an on chain final
aggregate from a list of network aggregates with equal `AttestationData`:

```python
def compute_on_chain_aggregate(network_aggregates: Sequence[Attestation]) -> Attestation:
    aggregates = sorted(
        network_aggregates, key=lambda a: get_committee_indices(a.committee_bits)[0]
    )

    data = aggregates[0].data
    aggregation_bits = Bitlist[MAX_VALIDATORS_PER_COMMITTEE * MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT]()
    for a in aggregates:
        for b in a.aggregation_bits:
            aggregation_bits.append(b)

    signature = bls.Aggregate([a.signature for a in aggregates])

    committee_indices = [get_committee_indices(a.committee_bits)[0] for a in aggregates]
    committee_flags = [(index in committee_indices) for index in range(0, MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT)]
    committee_bits = Bitvector[MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT](committee_flags)

    return Attestation(
        aggregation_bits=aggregation_bits,
        data=data,
        committee_bits=committee_bits,
        signature=signature,
    )
```

#### Deposits

*[New in Electra:EIP6110]* The expected number of deposits MUST be changed from
`min(MAX_DEPOSITS, eth1_data.deposit_count - state.eth1_deposit_index)` to the
result of the following function:

```python
def get_eth1_pending_deposit_count(state: BeaconState) -> uint64:
    eth1_deposit_index_limit = min(
        state.eth1_data.deposit_count, state.deposit_requests_start_index
    )
    if state.eth1_deposit_index < eth1_deposit_index_limit:
        return min(MAX_DEPOSITS, eth1_deposit_index_limit - state.eth1_deposit_index)
    else:
        return uint64(0)
```

*Note*: Clients will be able to remove the `Eth1Data` polling mechanism in an
uncoordinated fashion once the transition period is finished. The transition
period is considered finished when a network reaches the point where
`state.eth1_deposit_index == state.deposit_requests_start_index`.

```python
def get_eth1_vote(state: BeaconState, eth1_chain: Sequence[Eth1Block]) -> Eth1Data:
    # [New in Electra:EIP6110]
    if state.eth1_deposit_index == state.deposit_requests_start_index:
        return state.eth1_data

    period_start = voting_period_start_time(state)
    # `eth1_chain` abstractly represents all blocks in the eth1 chain sorted by ascending block height
    votes_to_consider = [
        get_eth1_data(block)
        for block in eth1_chain
        if (
            is_candidate_block(block, period_start)
            # Ensure cannot move back to earlier deposit contract states
            and get_eth1_data(block).deposit_count >= state.eth1_data.deposit_count
        )
    ]

    # Valid votes already cast during this period
    valid_votes = [vote for vote in state.eth1_data_votes if vote in votes_to_consider]

    # Default vote on latest eth1 block data in the period range unless eth1 chain is not live
    # Non-substantive casting for linter
    state_eth1_data: Eth1Data = state.eth1_data
    default_vote = (
        votes_to_consider[len(votes_to_consider) - 1] if any(votes_to_consider) else state_eth1_data
    )

    return max(
        valid_votes,
        # Tiebreak by smallest distance
        key=lambda v: (
            valid_votes.count(v),
            -valid_votes.index(v),
        ),
        default=default_vote,
    )
```

#### Execution payload

`prepare_execution_payload` is updated from the Deneb specs.

*Note*: In this section, `state` is the state of the slot for the block proposal
_without_ the block yet applied. That is, `state` is the `previous_state`
processed through any empty slots up to the assigned slot using
`process_slots(previous_state, slot)`.

*Note*: The only change to `prepare_execution_payload` is the new definition of
`get_expected_withdrawals`.

```python
def prepare_execution_payload(
    state: BeaconState,
    safe_block_hash: Hash32,
    finalized_block_hash: Hash32,
    suggested_fee_recipient: ExecutionAddress,
    execution_engine: ExecutionEngine,
) -> Optional[PayloadId]:
    # Verify consistency of the parent hash with respect to the previous execution payload header
    parent_hash = state.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash

    # [Modified in EIP7251]
    # Set the forkchoice head and initiate the payload build process
    withdrawals, _ = get_expected_withdrawals(state)

    payload_attributes = PayloadAttributes(
        timestamp=compute_time_at_slot(state, state.slot),
        prev_randao=get_randao_mix(state, get_current_epoch(state)),
        suggested_fee_recipient=suggested_fee_recipient,
        withdrawals=withdrawals,
        parent_beacon_block_root=hash_tree_root(state.latest_block_header),
    )
    return execution_engine.notify_forkchoice_updated(
        head_block_hash=parent_hash,
        safe_block_hash=safe_block_hash,
        finalized_block_hash=finalized_block_hash,
        payload_attributes=payload_attributes,
    )
```

#### Execution Requests

*[New in Electra]*

1. The execution payload is obtained from the execution engine as defined above
   using `payload_id`. The response also includes a `execution_requests` entry
   containing a list of bytes. Each element on the list corresponds to one SSZ
   list of requests as defined in
   [EIP-7685](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7685). The first byte of each
   request is used to determine the request type. Requests must be ordered by
   request type in ascending order. As a result, there can only be at most one
   instance of each request type.
2. Set
   `block.body.execution_requests = get_execution_requests(execution_requests)`,
   where:

```python
def get_execution_requests(execution_requests_list: Sequence[bytes]) -> ExecutionRequests:
    deposits = []
    withdrawals = []
    consolidations = []

    request_types = [
        DEPOSIT_REQUEST_TYPE,
        WITHDRAWAL_REQUEST_TYPE,
        CONSOLIDATION_REQUEST_TYPE,
    ]

    prev_request_type = None
    for request in execution_requests_list:
        request_type, request_data = request[0:1], request[1:]

        # Check that the request type is valid
        assert request_type in request_types
        # Check that the request data is not empty
        assert len(request_data) != 0
        # Check that requests are in strictly ascending order
        # Each successive type must be greater than the last with no duplicates
        assert prev_request_type is None or prev_request_type < request_type
        prev_request_type = request_type

        if request_type == DEPOSIT_REQUEST_TYPE:
            deposits = ssz_deserialize(
                List[DepositRequest, MAX_DEPOSIT_REQUESTS_PER_PAYLOAD], request_data
            )
        elif request_type == WITHDRAWAL_REQUEST_TYPE:
            withdrawals = ssz_deserialize(
                List[WithdrawalRequest, MAX_WITHDRAWAL_REQUESTS_PER_PAYLOAD], request_data
            )
        elif request_type == CONSOLIDATION_REQUEST_TYPE:
            consolidations = ssz_deserialize(
                List[ConsolidationRequest, MAX_CONSOLIDATION_REQUESTS_PER_PAYLOAD], request_data
            )

    return ExecutionRequests(
        deposits=deposits,
        withdrawals=withdrawals,
        consolidations=consolidations,
    )
```

### Constructing the `BlobSidecar`s

#### Sidecar

*[Modified in Electra:EIP7691]*

```python
def compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(blob_index: BlobIndex) -> SubnetID:
    return SubnetID(blob_index % BLOB_SIDECAR_SUBNET_COUNT_ELECTRA)
```

## Attesting

### Construct attestation

The validator creates `attestation` as a `SingleAttestation` container with
updated field assignments:

- Set `attestation_data.index = 0`.
- Set `attestation.committee_index` to the index associated with the validator's
  committee.
- Set `attestation.attester_index` to the index of the validator.

## Attestation aggregation

### Construct aggregate

- Set `attestation_data.index = 0`.
- Let `aggregation_bits` be a
  `Bitlist[MAX_VALIDATORS_PER_COMMITTEE * MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT]` of length
  `len(committee)`, where each bit set from each individual attestation is set
  to `0b1`.
- Set `attestation.committee_bits = committee_bits`, where `committee_bits` has
  the bit set corresponding to `committee_index` in each individual attestation.

Commit message:

eip7688: use forward compatible SSZ types in Gloas
EIP-4788 exposed the beacon root to smart contracts, but smart contracts
need to be redeployed / upgraded whenever generalized indices change
during a fork, even if that fork does not touch any used functionality.
That is analogous to an OS without ABI stability, requiring programs
to be maintained and re-compiled due to random breakages in OS updates.

This issue expands further to bridges on other blockchains, and also
into wallets / dApps that verify data from the beacon chain instead.
Such projects do not typically share Ethereum's release cadence.

- https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4788

EIP-7688 introduces forward compatibility for beacon chain structures.
Generalized indices remain same when list capacities evolve over forks,
containers no longer get re-indexed when reaching a new power-of-2
number of fields, and fields can be deprecated, leaving a gap in the
Merkle tree instead of triggering re-indexing.

- https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7688

EIP-7688 was requested for inclusion by popular projects:

- For Electra by Rocketpool: https://xcancel.com/KaneWallmann/status/1816729724145795258
- For Fulu by Lido: https://github.com/ethereum/pm/issues/1356#issuecomment-2733443137

specs/electra/validator.md, after:

# Electra -- Honest Validator

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Helpers](#helpers)
  - [Modified `GetPayloadResponse`](#modified-getpayloadresponse)
- [Containers](#containers)
  - [Modified containers](#modified-containers)
    - [`AggregateAndProof`](#aggregateandproof)
    - [`SignedAggregateAndProof`](#signedaggregateandproof)
- [Protocols](#protocols)
  - [`ExecutionEngine`](#executionengine)
    - [Modified `get_payload`](#modified-get_payload)
- [Block proposal](#block-proposal)
  - [Constructing the `BeaconBlockBody`](#constructing-the-beaconblockbody)
    - [Attester slashings](#attester-slashings)
    - [Attestations](#attestations)
    - [Deposits](#deposits)
    - [Execution payload](#execution-payload)
    - [Execution Requests](#execution-requests)
  - [Constructing the `BlobSidecar`s](#constructing-the-blobsidecars)
    - [Sidecar](#sidecar)
- [Attesting](#attesting)
  - [Construct attestation](#construct-attestation)
- [Attestation aggregation](#attestation-aggregation)
  - [Construct aggregate](#construct-aggregate)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document represents the changes to be made in the code of an "honest
validator" to implement Electra.

## Prerequisites

This document is an extension of the
[Deneb -- Honest Validator](../deneb/validator.md) guide. All behaviors and
definitions defined in this document, and documents it extends, carry over
unless explicitly noted or overridden.

All terminology, constants, functions, and protocol mechanics defined in the
updated Beacon Chain doc of [Electra](./beacon-chain.md) are requisite for this
document and used throughout. Please see related Beacon Chain doc before
continuing and use them as a reference throughout.

## Helpers

### Modified `GetPayloadResponse`

```python
@dataclass
class GetPayloadResponse(object):
    execution_payload: ExecutionPayload
    block_value: uint256
    blobs_bundle: BlobsBundle
    # [New in Electra]
    execution_requests: Sequence[bytes]
```

## Containers

### Modified containers

#### `AggregateAndProof`

```python
class AggregateAndProof(Container):
    aggregator_index: ValidatorIndex
    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    aggregate: Attestation
    selection_proof: BLSSignature
```

#### `SignedAggregateAndProof`

```python
class SignedAggregateAndProof(Container):
    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    message: AggregateAndProof
    signature: BLSSignature
```

## Protocols

### `ExecutionEngine`

#### Modified `get_payload`

Given the `payload_id`, `get_payload` returns the most recent version of the
execution payload that has been built since the corresponding call to
`notify_forkchoice_updated` method.

```python
def get_payload(self: ExecutionEngine, payload_id: PayloadId) -> GetPayloadResponse:
    """
    Return ExecutionPayload, uint256, BlobsBundle and execution requests (as Sequence[bytes]) objects.
    """
    # pylint: disable=unused-argument
    ...
```

## Block proposal

### Constructing the `BeaconBlockBody`

#### Attester slashings

Changed the max attester slashings size to `MAX_ATTESTER_SLASHINGS_ELECTRA`.

#### Attestations

Changed the max attestations size to `MAX_ATTESTATIONS_ELECTRA`.

The network attestation aggregates contain only the assigned committee
attestations. Attestation aggregates received by the block proposer from the
committee aggregators with disjoint `committee_bits` sets and equal
`AttestationData` SHOULD be consolidated into a single `Attestation` object. The
proposer should run the following function to construct an on chain final
aggregate from a list of network aggregates with equal `AttestationData`:

```python
def compute_on_chain_aggregate(network_aggregates: Sequence[Attestation]) -> Attestation:
    aggregates = sorted(
        network_aggregates, key=lambda a: get_committee_indices(a.committee_bits)[0]
    )

    data = aggregates[0].data
    aggregation_bits = AggregationBits()
    for a in aggregates:
        for b in a.aggregation_bits:
            aggregation_bits.append(b)

    signature = bls.Aggregate([a.signature for a in aggregates])

    committee_indices = [get_committee_indices(a.committee_bits)[0] for a in aggregates]
    committee_flags = [(index in committee_indices) for index in range(0, MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT)]
    committee_bits = Bitvector[MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT](committee_flags)

    return Attestation(
        aggregation_bits=aggregation_bits,
        data=data,
        committee_bits=committee_bits,
        signature=signature,
    )
```

#### Deposits

*[New in Electra:EIP6110]* The expected number of deposits MUST be changed from
`min(MAX_DEPOSITS, eth1_data.deposit_count - state.eth1_deposit_index)` to the
result of the following function:

```python
def get_eth1_pending_deposit_count(state: BeaconState) -> uint64:
    eth1_deposit_index_limit = min(
        state.eth1_data.deposit_count, state.deposit_requests_start_index
    )
    if state.eth1_deposit_index < eth1_deposit_index_limit:
        return min(MAX_DEPOSITS, eth1_deposit_index_limit - state.eth1_deposit_index)
    else:
        return uint64(0)
```

*Note*: Clients will be able to remove the `Eth1Data` polling mechanism in an
uncoordinated fashion once the transition period is finished. The transition
period is considered finished when a network reaches the point where
`state.eth1_deposit_index == state.deposit_requests_start_index`.

```python
def get_eth1_vote(state: BeaconState, eth1_chain: Sequence[Eth1Block]) -> Eth1Data:
    # [New in Electra:EIP6110]
    if state.eth1_deposit_index == state.deposit_requests_start_index:
        return state.eth1_data

    period_start = voting_period_start_time(state)
    # `eth1_chain` abstractly represents all blocks in the eth1 chain sorted by ascending block height
    votes_to_consider = [
        get_eth1_data(block)
        for block in eth1_chain
        if (
            is_candidate_block(block, period_start)
            # Ensure cannot move back to earlier deposit contract states
            and get_eth1_data(block).deposit_count >= state.eth1_data.deposit_count
        )
    ]

    # Valid votes already cast during this period
    valid_votes = [vote for vote in state.eth1_data_votes if vote in votes_to_consider]

    # Default vote on latest eth1 block data in the period range unless eth1 chain is not live
    # Non-substantive casting for linter
    state_eth1_data: Eth1Data = state.eth1_data
    default_vote = (
        votes_to_consider[len(votes_to_consider) - 1] if any(votes_to_consider) else state_eth1_data
    )

    return max(
        valid_votes,
        # Tiebreak by smallest distance
        key=lambda v: (
            valid_votes.count(v),
            -valid_votes.index(v),
        ),
        default=default_vote,
    )
```

#### Execution payload

`prepare_execution_payload` is updated from the Deneb specs.

*Note*: In this section, `state` is the state of the slot for the block proposal
_without_ the block yet applied. That is, `state` is the `previous_state`
processed through any empty slots up to the assigned slot using
`process_slots(previous_state, slot)`.

*Note*: The only change to `prepare_execution_payload` is the new definition of
`get_expected_withdrawals`.

```python
def prepare_execution_payload(
    state: BeaconState,
    safe_block_hash: Hash32,
    finalized_block_hash: Hash32,
    suggested_fee_recipient: ExecutionAddress,
    execution_engine: ExecutionEngine,
) -> Optional[PayloadId]:
    # Verify consistency of the parent hash with respect to the previous execution payload header
    parent_hash = state.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash

    # [Modified in EIP7251]
    # Set the forkchoice head and initiate the payload build process
    withdrawals, _ = get_expected_withdrawals(state)

    payload_attributes = PayloadAttributes(
        timestamp=compute_time_at_slot(state, state.slot),
        prev_randao=get_randao_mix(state, get_current_epoch(state)),
        suggested_fee_recipient=suggested_fee_recipient,
        withdrawals=withdrawals,
        parent_beacon_block_root=hash_tree_root(state.latest_block_header),
    )
    return execution_engine.notify_forkchoice_updated(
        head_block_hash=parent_hash,
        safe_block_hash=safe_block_hash,
        finalized_block_hash=finalized_block_hash,
        payload_attributes=payload_attributes,
    )
```

#### Execution Requests

*[New in Electra]*

1. The execution payload is obtained from the execution engine as defined above
   using `payload_id`. The response also includes a `execution_requests` entry
   containing a list of bytes. Each element on the list corresponds to one SSZ
   list of requests as defined in
   [EIP-7685](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7685). The first byte of each
   request is used to determine the request type. Requests must be ordered by
   request type in ascending order. As a result, there can only be at most one
   instance of each request type.
2. Set
   `block.body.execution_requests = get_execution_requests(execution_requests)`,
   where:

```python
def get_execution_requests(execution_requests_list: Sequence[bytes]) -> ExecutionRequests:
    deposits = []
    withdrawals = []
    consolidations = []

    request_types = [
        DEPOSIT_REQUEST_TYPE,
        WITHDRAWAL_REQUEST_TYPE,
        CONSOLIDATION_REQUEST_TYPE,
    ]

    prev_request_type = None
    for request in execution_requests_list:
        request_type, request_data = request[0:1], request[1:]

        # Check that the request type is valid
        assert request_type in request_types
        # Check that the request data is not empty
        assert len(request_data) != 0
        # Check that requests are in strictly ascending order
        # Each successive type must be greater than the last with no duplicates
        assert prev_request_type is None or prev_request_type < request_type
        prev_request_type = request_type

        if request_type == DEPOSIT_REQUEST_TYPE:
            deposits = ssz_deserialize(DepositRequests, request_data)
        elif request_type == WITHDRAWAL_REQUEST_TYPE:
            withdrawals = ssz_deserialize(WithdrawalRequests, request_data)
        elif request_type == CONSOLIDATION_REQUEST_TYPE:
            consolidations = ssz_deserialize(ConsolidationRequests, request_data)

    return ExecutionRequests(
        deposits=deposits,
        withdrawals=withdrawals,
        consolidations=consolidations,
    )
```

### Constructing the `BlobSidecar`s

#### Sidecar

*[Modified in Electra:EIP7691]*

```python
def compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(blob_index: BlobIndex) -> SubnetID:
    return SubnetID(blob_index % BLOB_SIDECAR_SUBNET_COUNT_ELECTRA)
```

## Attesting

### Construct attestation

The validator creates `attestation` as a `SingleAttestation` container with
updated field assignments:

- Set `attestation_data.index = 0`.
- Set `attestation.committee_index` to the index associated with the validator's
  committee.
- Set `attestation.attester_index` to the index of the validator.

## Attestation aggregation

### Construct aggregate

- Set `attestation_data.index = 0`.
- Set `aggregate_attestation.aggregation_bits` to an `AggregationBits` of length
  `len(committee)` with the bits corresponding to the `attester_index` of each
  `SingleAttestation` inputs set to `0b1`.
- Set `aggregate_attestation.committee_bits` to a
  `Bitvector[MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT]` with the single bit corresponding to the
  shared `committee_index` across all `SingleAttestation` inputs set to `0b1`.
