specs/_features/eip7732/fork.md, before:

# EIP-7732 -- Fork Logic

*Note*: This document is a work-in-progress for researchers and implementers.

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Helper functions](#helper-functions)
  - [Misc](#misc)
    - [Modified `compute_fork_version`](#modified-compute_fork_version)
- [Fork to EIP-7732](#fork-to-eip-7732)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of the EIP-7732 upgrade.

## Configuration

Warning: this configuration is not definitive.

| Name                   | Value                                 |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `EIP7732_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x09000000')`               |
| `EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(18446744073709551615)` **TBD** |

## Helper functions

### Misc

#### Modified `compute_fork_version`

```python
def compute_fork_version(epoch: Epoch) -> Version:
    """
    Return the fork version at the given ``epoch``.
    """
    if epoch >= EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH:
        return EIP7732_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= ELECTRA_FORK_EPOCH:
        return ELECTRA_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= DENEB_FORK_EPOCH:
        return DENEB_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= CAPELLA_FORK_EPOCH:
        return CAPELLA_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH:
        return BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= ALTAIR_FORK_EPOCH:
        return ALTAIR_FORK_VERSION
    return GENESIS_FORK_VERSION
```

## Fork to EIP-7732

### Fork trigger

The fork is triggered at epoch `EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH`. The EIP may be combined
with other consensus-layer upgrade.

### Upgrading the state

If `state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0` and
`compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot) == EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH`, an irregular state
change is made to upgrade to EIP-7732.

```python
def upgrade_to_eip7732(pre: electra.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = electra.get_current_epoch(pre)

    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [Modified in EIP-7732]
            current_version=EIP7732_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        # [Modified in EIP-7732]
        latest_execution_payload_header=ExecutionPayloadHeader(),
        next_withdrawal_index=pre.next_withdrawal_index,
        next_withdrawal_validator_index=pre.next_withdrawal_validator_index,
        historical_summaries=pre.historical_summaries,
        deposit_requests_start_index=pre.deposit_requests_start_index,
        deposit_balance_to_consume=pre.deposit_balance_to_consume,
        exit_balance_to_consume=pre.exit_balance_to_consume,
        earliest_exit_epoch=pre.earliest_exit_epoch,
        consolidation_balance_to_consume=pre.consolidation_balance_to_consume,
        earliest_consolidation_epoch=pre.earliest_consolidation_epoch,
        pending_deposits=pre.pending_deposits,
        pending_partial_withdrawals=pre.pending_partial_withdrawals,
        pending_consolidations=pre.pending_consolidations,
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        latest_block_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash,
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        latest_full_slot=pre.slot,
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        latest_withdrawals_root=Root(),
    )

    return post
```

Commit message:

Update payment mechanism to use withdrawals
- Move some presets to constants
- Add a queue of builder pending payments and a queue of builder pending
  withdrawals to the beacon state
- Add a fee recipient to the builder's bid
- Modify process epoch to either delete the builder's pending payment if
  the block was not voted enough, or queue a withdrawal if the block was
voted enough. Every epoch the pending payments from the previous epoch
are all processed (unless the payload was already included in which case
the payment was already processed) and the current epoch payments are
moved to the beginning of the queue.
- Modify the withdrawal handling by first processing all withdrawals
  from the builder's pending queue, before any other withdrawal. These
withdrawals are processed as follows. If the builder is slashed then
they are kept in the queue until the builder is withdrawable, in which
case the payments will be fullfilled with the remaining balance.
- Modify how to process the bid in the beacon block. Instead of
  deducting the builder immediately, we set a pending payment in the
queue, to be deducted later with the churn when processing the
withdrawal.
- Modify process attestations to keep track of those attestations that
  voted for the beacon block when no payload was included.

specs/_features/eip7732/fork.md, after:

# EIP-7732 -- Fork Logic

*Note*: This document is a work-in-progress for researchers and implementers.

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Helper functions](#helper-functions)
  - [Misc](#misc)
    - [Modified `compute_fork_version`](#modified-compute_fork_version)
- [Fork to EIP-7732](#fork-to-eip-7732)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of the EIP-7732 upgrade.

## Configuration

Warning: this configuration is not definitive.

| Name                   | Value                                 |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `EIP7732_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x09000000')`               |
| `EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(18446744073709551615)` **TBD** |

## Helper functions

### Misc

#### Modified `compute_fork_version`

```python
def compute_fork_version(epoch: Epoch) -> Version:
    """
    Return the fork version at the given ``epoch``.
    """
    if epoch >= EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH:
        return EIP7732_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= ELECTRA_FORK_EPOCH:
        return ELECTRA_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= DENEB_FORK_EPOCH:
        return DENEB_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= CAPELLA_FORK_EPOCH:
        return CAPELLA_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= BELLATRIX_FORK_EPOCH:
        return BELLATRIX_FORK_VERSION
    if epoch >= ALTAIR_FORK_EPOCH:
        return ALTAIR_FORK_VERSION
    return GENESIS_FORK_VERSION
```

## Fork to EIP-7732

### Fork trigger

The fork is triggered at epoch `EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH`. The EIP may be combined
with other consensus-layer upgrade.

### Upgrading the state

If `state.slot % SLOTS_PER_EPOCH == 0` and
`compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot) == EIP7732_FORK_EPOCH`, an irregular state
change is made to upgrade to EIP-7732.

```python
def upgrade_to_eip7732(pre: electra.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = electra.get_current_epoch(pre)

    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [Modified in EIP-7732]
            current_version=EIP7732_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        # [Modified in EIP-7732]
        latest_execution_payload_header=ExecutionPayloadHeader(),
        next_withdrawal_index=pre.next_withdrawal_index,
        next_withdrawal_validator_index=pre.next_withdrawal_validator_index,
        historical_summaries=pre.historical_summaries,
        deposit_requests_start_index=pre.deposit_requests_start_index,
        deposit_balance_to_consume=pre.deposit_balance_to_consume,
        exit_balance_to_consume=pre.exit_balance_to_consume,
        earliest_exit_epoch=pre.earliest_exit_epoch,
        consolidation_balance_to_consume=pre.consolidation_balance_to_consume,
        earliest_consolidation_epoch=pre.earliest_consolidation_epoch,
        pending_deposits=pre.pending_deposits,
        pending_partial_withdrawals=pre.pending_partial_withdrawals,
        pending_consolidations=pre.pending_consolidations,
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        builder_pending_payments=[BuilderPendingPayment() for _ in range(2 * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH)],
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        builder_pending_withdrawals=[],
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        latest_block_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash,
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        latest_full_slot=pre.slot,
        # [New in EIP-7732]
        latest_withdrawals_root=Root(),
    )

    return post
```
