specs/deneb/fork.md, before:

# Deneb -- Fork Logic

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Fork to Deneb](#fork-to-deneb)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of Deneb upgrade.

## Configuration

Warning: this configuration is not definitive.

| Name                 | Value                                            |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| `DENEB_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x04000000')`                          |
| `DENEB_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(269568)` (March 13, 2024, 01:55:35pm UTC) |

## Fork to Deneb

### Fork trigger

The fork is triggered at epoch `DENEB_FORK_EPOCH`.

Note that for the pure Deneb networks, we don't apply `upgrade_to_deneb` since
it starts with Deneb version logic.

### Upgrading the state

```python
def upgrade_to_deneb(pre: capella.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = capella.get_current_epoch(pre)
    latest_execution_payload_header = ExecutionPayloadHeader(
        parent_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.parent_hash,
        fee_recipient=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.fee_recipient,
        state_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.state_root,
        receipts_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.receipts_root,
        logs_bloom=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.logs_bloom,
        prev_randao=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.prev_randao,
        block_number=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_number,
        gas_limit=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_limit,
        gas_used=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_used,
        timestamp=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.timestamp,
        extra_data=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.extra_data,
        base_fee_per_gas=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.base_fee_per_gas,
        block_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash,
        transactions_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.transactions_root,
        withdrawals_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.withdrawals_root,
        # [New in Deneb:EIP4844]
        blob_gas_used=uint64(0),
        # [New in Deneb:EIP4844]
        excess_blob_gas=uint64(0),
    )
    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [Modified in Deneb]
            current_version=DENEB_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        # [Modified in Deneb:EIP4844]
        latest_execution_payload_header=latest_execution_payload_header,
        next_withdrawal_index=pre.next_withdrawal_index,
        next_withdrawal_validator_index=pre.next_withdrawal_validator_index,
        historical_summaries=pre.historical_summaries,
    )

    return post
```

Commit message:

updated testnet genesis state descriptions

specs/deneb/fork.md, after:

# Deneb -- Fork Logic

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Fork to Deneb](#fork-to-deneb)
  - [Fork trigger](#fork-trigger)
  - [Upgrading the state](#upgrading-the-state)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Introduction

This document describes the process of Deneb upgrade.

## Configuration

Warning: this configuration is not definitive.

| Name                 | Value                                            |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| `DENEB_FORK_VERSION` | `Version('0x04000000')`                          |
| `DENEB_FORK_EPOCH`   | `Epoch(269568)` (March 13, 2024, 01:55:35pm UTC) |

## Fork to Deneb

### Fork trigger

The fork is triggered at epoch `DENEB_FORK_EPOCH`.

*Note*: For the pure Deneb networks, the `upgrade_to_deneb` function is applied
to transition the genesis state to this fork.

### Upgrading the state

```python
def upgrade_to_deneb(pre: capella.BeaconState) -> BeaconState:
    epoch = capella.get_current_epoch(pre)
    latest_execution_payload_header = ExecutionPayloadHeader(
        parent_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.parent_hash,
        fee_recipient=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.fee_recipient,
        state_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.state_root,
        receipts_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.receipts_root,
        logs_bloom=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.logs_bloom,
        prev_randao=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.prev_randao,
        block_number=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_number,
        gas_limit=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_limit,
        gas_used=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.gas_used,
        timestamp=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.timestamp,
        extra_data=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.extra_data,
        base_fee_per_gas=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.base_fee_per_gas,
        block_hash=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.block_hash,
        transactions_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.transactions_root,
        withdrawals_root=pre.latest_execution_payload_header.withdrawals_root,
        # [New in Deneb:EIP4844]
        blob_gas_used=uint64(0),
        # [New in Deneb:EIP4844]
        excess_blob_gas=uint64(0),
    )
    post = BeaconState(
        genesis_time=pre.genesis_time,
        genesis_validators_root=pre.genesis_validators_root,
        slot=pre.slot,
        fork=Fork(
            previous_version=pre.fork.current_version,
            # [Modified in Deneb]
            current_version=DENEB_FORK_VERSION,
            epoch=epoch,
        ),
        latest_block_header=pre.latest_block_header,
        block_roots=pre.block_roots,
        state_roots=pre.state_roots,
        historical_roots=pre.historical_roots,
        eth1_data=pre.eth1_data,
        eth1_data_votes=pre.eth1_data_votes,
        eth1_deposit_index=pre.eth1_deposit_index,
        validators=pre.validators,
        balances=pre.balances,
        randao_mixes=pre.randao_mixes,
        slashings=pre.slashings,
        previous_epoch_participation=pre.previous_epoch_participation,
        current_epoch_participation=pre.current_epoch_participation,
        justification_bits=pre.justification_bits,
        previous_justified_checkpoint=pre.previous_justified_checkpoint,
        current_justified_checkpoint=pre.current_justified_checkpoint,
        finalized_checkpoint=pre.finalized_checkpoint,
        inactivity_scores=pre.inactivity_scores,
        current_sync_committee=pre.current_sync_committee,
        next_sync_committee=pre.next_sync_committee,
        # [Modified in Deneb:EIP4844]
        latest_execution_payload_header=latest_execution_payload_header,
        next_withdrawal_index=pre.next_withdrawal_index,
        next_withdrawal_validator_index=pre.next_withdrawal_validator_index,
        historical_summaries=pre.historical_summaries,
    )

    return post
```
