tests/formats/README.md, before:

# General test format

This document defines the YAML format and structure used for consensus spec
testing.

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [About](#about)
  - [Test-case formats](#test-case-formats)
- [Glossary](#glossary)
- [Test format philosophy](#test-format-philosophy)
  - [Config design](#config-design)
  - [Test completeness](#test-completeness)
- [Test structure](#test-structure)
  - [`<config name>/`](#config-name)
  - [`<fork or phase name>/`](#fork-or-phase-name)
  - [`<test runner name>/`](#test-runner-name)
  - [`<test handler name>/`](#test-handler-name)
  - [`<test suite name>/`](#test-suite-name)
  - [`<test case>/`](#test-case)
  - [`<output part>`](#output-part)
    - [Common output formats](#common-output-formats)
    - [Special output parts](#special-output-parts)
      - [`meta.yaml`](#metayaml)
      - [`config.yaml`](#configyaml)
- [Config sourcing](#config-sourcing)
- [Note for implementers](#note-for-implementers)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## About

The consensus layer uses YAML as the format for all cross client tests. This
document describes at a high level the general format to which all test files
should conform.

### Test-case formats

The particular formats of specific types of tests (test suites) are defined in
separate documents.

Test formats:

- [`bls`](./bls/README.md)
- [`epoch_processing`](./epoch_processing/README.md)
- [`genesis`](./genesis/README.md)
- [`operations`](./operations/README.md)
- [`sanity`](./sanity/README.md)
- [`shuffling`](./shuffling/README.md)
- [`ssz_generic`](./ssz_generic/README.md)
- [`ssz_static`](./ssz_static/README.md)
- More formats are planned, see tracking issues for CI/testing

## Glossary

- `generator`: a program that outputs one or more test-cases, each organized
  into a `config > runner > handler > suite` hierarchy.
- `config`: tests are grouped by configuration used for spec presets. In
  addition to the standard configurations, `general` may be used as a catch-all
  for tests not restricted to one configuration. (E.g. BLS).
- `type`: the specialization of one single `generator`. E.g. epoch processing.
- `runner`: where a generator is a *"producer"*, this is the *"consumer"*.
  - A `runner` focuses on *only one* `type`, and each type has *only one*
    `runner`.
- `handler`: a `runner` may be too limited sometimes, you may have a set of
  tests with a specific focus that requires a different format. To facilitate
  this, you specify a `handler`: the runner can deal with the format by using
  the specified handler.
- `suite`: a directory containing test cases that are coherent. Each `suite`
  under the same `handler` shares the same format. This is an
  organizational/cosmetic hierarchy layer.
- `case`: a test case, a directory in a `suite`. A case can be anything in
  general, but its format should be well-defined in the documentation
  corresponding to the `type` (and `handler`).
- `case part`: a test case consists of different files, possibly in different
  formats, to facilitate the specific test case format better. Optionally, a
  `meta.yaml` is included to declare meta-data for the test, e.g. BLS
  requirements.

## Test format philosophy

### Config design

The configuration constant types are:

- Never changing: genesis data.
- Changing, but reliant on old value: e.g. an epoch time may change, but if you
  want to do the conversion `(genesis data, timestamp) -> epoch number`, you end
  up needing both constants.
- Changing, but kept around during fork transition: finalization may take a
  while, e.g. an executable has to deal with new deposits and old deposits at
  the same time. Another example may be economic constants.
- Additional, backwards compatible: new constants are introduced for later
  phases.
- Changing: there is a very small chance some constant may really be *replaced*.
  In this off-chance, it is likely better to include it as an additional
  variable, and some clients may simply stop supporting the old one if they do
  not want to sync from genesis. The change of functionality goes through a
  phase of deprecation of the old constant, and eventually only the new constant
  is kept around in the config (when old state is not supported anymore).

Based on these types of changes, we model the config as a list of key value
pairs, that only grows with every fork (they may change in development versions
of forks, however; git manages this). With this approach, configurations are
backwards compatible (older clients ignore unknown variables) and easy to
maintain.

### Test completeness

Tests should be independent of any sync-data. If one wants to run a test, the
input data should be available from the YAML. The aim is to provide clients with
a well-defined scope of work to run a particular set of test-suites.

- Clients that are complete are expected to contribute to testing, seeking for
  better resources to get conformance with the spec, and other clients.
- Clients that are not complete in functionality can choose to ignore suites
  that use certain test-runners, or specific handlers of these test-runners.
- Clients that are on older versions can test their work based on older releases
  of the generated tests, and catch up with newer releases when possible.

## Test structure

```
File path structure:
tests/<config name>/<fork or phase name>/<test runner name>/<test handler name>/<test suite name>/<test case>/<output part>
```

### `<config name>/`

Configs are upper level. Some clients want to run minimal first, and useful for
sanity checks during development too. As a top level dir, it is not duplicated,
and the used config can be copied right into this directory as reference.

### `<fork or phase name>/`

This would be: "phase0", "altair", etc. Each introduces new tests, and modifies
any tests that change: some tests of earlier forks repeat with updated state
data.

### `<test runner name>/`

The well known bls/shuffling/ssz_static/operations/epoch_processing/etc.
Handlers can change the format, but there is a general target to test.

### `<test handler name>/`

Specialization within category. All suites in here will have the same test case
format. Using a `handler` in a `runner` is optional. A `core` (or other generic)
handler may be used if the `runner` does not have different formats.

### `<test suite name>/`

Suites are split up. Suite size (i.e. the amount of tests) does not change the
maximum memory requirement, as test cases can be loaded one by one. This also
makes filtered sets of tests fast and easy to load.

### `<test case>/`

Cases are split up too. This enables diffing of parts of the test case, tracking
changes per part, while still using LFS. Also enables different formats for some
parts.

### `<output part>`

These files allow for custom formats for some parts of the test. E.g. something
encoded in SSZ. Or to avoid large files, the SSZ can be compressed with Snappy.
E.g. `pre.ssz_snappy`, `deposit.ssz_snappy`, `post.ssz_snappy`.

Diffing a `pre.ssz_snappy` and `post.ssz_snappy` provides all the information
for testing, when decompressed and decoded. Then the difference between pre and
post can be compared to anything that changes the pre state, e.g.
`deposit.ssz_snappy`

Note that by default, the SSZ data is in the given test case's
<fork or phase name> version, e.g., if it's `altair` test case, use
`altair.BeaconState` container to deserialize the given state.

YAML is generally used for test metadata, and for tests that do not use SSZ:
e.g. shuffling and BLS tests. In this case, there is no point in adding special
SSZ types. And the size and efficiency of YAML is acceptable.

#### Common output formats

Between all types of tests, a few formats are common:

- **`.yaml`**: A YAML file containing structured data to describe settings or
  test contents.
- **`.ssz`**: A file containing raw SSZ-encoded data. Previously widely used in
  tests, but replaced with compressed variant.
- **`.ssz_snappy`**: Like `.ssz`, but compressed with Snappy block compression.
  Snappy block compression is already applied to SSZ in consensus-layer gossip,
  available in client implementations, and thus chosen as compression method.

#### Special output parts

##### `meta.yaml`

If present (it is optional), the test is enhanced with extra data to describe
usage. Specialized data is described in the documentation of the specific test
format.

Common data is documented here:

Some test-case formats share some common key-value pair patterns, and these are
documented here:

```
bls_setting: int     -- optional, can have 3 different values:
                            0: (default, applies if key-value pair is absent). Free to choose either BLS ON or OFF.
                                 Tests are generated with valid BLS data in this case,
                                 but there is no change of outcome when running the test if BLS is ON or OFF.
                            1: known as "BLS required" - if the test validity is strictly dependent on BLS being ON
                            2: known as "BLS ignored"  - if the test validity is strictly dependent on BLS being OFF
```

##### `config.yaml`

The runtime-configurables may be different for specific tests. When present,
this replaces the default runtime-config that comes with the otherwise
compile-time preset settings.

The format matches that of the `mainnet_config.yaml` and `minimal_config.yaml`,
see the [`/configs`](../../configs/README.md#format) documentation. Config
values that are introduced at a later fork may be omitted from tests of previous
forks.

## Config sourcing

The constants configurations are located in:

```
<specs repo root>/configs/<config name>.yaml
```

And copied by CI for testing purposes to:

```
<tests repo root>/tests/<config name>/<config name>.yaml
```

The first `<config name>` is a directory, which contains exactly all tests that
make use of the given config.

## Note for implementers

The basic pattern for test-suite loading and running is:

1. For a specific config, load it first (and only need to do so once), then
   continue with the tests defined in the config folder.
2. Select a fork. Repeat for each fork if running tests for multiple forks.
3. Select the category and specialization of interest (e.g.
   `operations > deposits`). Again, repeat for each if running all.
4. Select a test suite. Or repeat for each.
5. Select a test case. Or repeat for each.
6. Load the parts of the case. And `meta.yaml` if present.
7. Run the test, as defined by the test format.

Step 1 may be a step with compile time selection of a configuration, if desired
for optimization. The base requirement is just to use the same set of constants,
independent of the loading process.

Commit message:

Add manifest file to each each reference test (#4712)
## Description

This PR adds a `manifest.yaml` file to every generated test vector. The
manifest contains
the test's metadata (config, fork, runner, handler, suite, and case
names) which was
     previously only available by parsing the directory path.
This makes it easier to distribute individual test vectors without
losing context about
what they're testing. It also helps when refactoring the directory
structure since the
     metadata is now embedded in each test case.

## Changes Made

- Added `dump_manifest()` method in `dumper.py` to generate the manifest
file
- Updated `gen_runner.py` to call `dump_manifest()` after writing test
outputs
     - Documented the manifest format in `tests/formats/README.md`

 - [x] Update documentation 
 - [x] Add tests for new functionality 
 - [x] Run `make lint` to check formatting
 - [ ] Run `make test` to check tests

Fixes #4602

---------

Co-authored-by: Justin Traglia <jtraglia@pm.me>
Co-authored-by: Leo Lara <leolara@users.noreply.github.com>

tests/formats/README.md, after:

# General test format

This document defines the YAML format and structure used for consensus spec
testing.

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=2 -->

- [About](#about)
  - [Test-case formats](#test-case-formats)
- [Glossary](#glossary)
- [Test format philosophy](#test-format-philosophy)
  - [Config design](#config-design)
  - [Test completeness](#test-completeness)
- [Test structure](#test-structure)
  - [`<config name>/`](#config-name)
  - [`<fork or phase name>/`](#fork-or-phase-name)
  - [`<test runner name>/`](#test-runner-name)
  - [`<test handler name>/`](#test-handler-name)
  - [`<test suite name>/`](#test-suite-name)
  - [`<test case>/`](#test-case)
  - [`<output part>`](#output-part)
    - [Common output formats](#common-output-formats)
    - [Special output parts](#special-output-parts)
      - [`meta.yaml`](#metayaml)
      - [`manifest.yaml`](#manifestyaml)
      - [`config.yaml`](#configyaml)
- [Config sourcing](#config-sourcing)
- [Note for implementers](#note-for-implementers)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## About

The consensus layer uses YAML as the format for all cross client tests. This
document describes at a high level the general format to which all test files
should conform.

### Test-case formats

The particular formats of specific types of tests (test suites) are defined in
separate documents.

Test formats:

- [`bls`](./bls/README.md)
- [`epoch_processing`](./epoch_processing/README.md)
- [`genesis`](./genesis/README.md)
- [`operations`](./operations/README.md)
- [`sanity`](./sanity/README.md)
- [`shuffling`](./shuffling/README.md)
- [`ssz_generic`](./ssz_generic/README.md)
- [`ssz_static`](./ssz_static/README.md)
- More formats are planned, see tracking issues for CI/testing

## Glossary

- `generator`: a program that outputs one or more test-cases, each organized
  into a `config > runner > handler > suite` hierarchy.
- `config`: tests are grouped by configuration used for spec presets. In
  addition to the standard configurations, `general` may be used as a catch-all
  for tests not restricted to one configuration. (E.g. BLS).
- `type`: the specialization of one single `generator`. E.g. epoch processing.
- `runner`: where a generator is a *"producer"*, this is the *"consumer"*.
  - A `runner` focuses on *only one* `type`, and each type has *only one*
    `runner`.
- `handler`: a `runner` may be too limited sometimes, you may have a set of
  tests with a specific focus that requires a different format. To facilitate
  this, you specify a `handler`: the runner can deal with the format by using
  the specified handler.
- `suite`: a directory containing test cases that are coherent. Each `suite`
  under the same `handler` shares the same format. This is an
  organizational/cosmetic hierarchy layer.
- `case`: a test case, a directory in a `suite`. A case can be anything in
  general, but its format should be well-defined in the documentation
  corresponding to the `type` (and `handler`).
- `case part`: a test case consists of different files, possibly in different
  formats, to facilitate the specific test case format better. Optionally, a
  `meta.yaml` is included to declare meta-data for the test, e.g. BLS
  requirements.

## Test format philosophy

### Config design

The configuration constant types are:

- Never changing: genesis data.
- Changing, but reliant on old value: e.g. an epoch time may change, but if you
  want to do the conversion `(genesis data, timestamp) -> epoch number`, you end
  up needing both constants.
- Changing, but kept around during fork transition: finalization may take a
  while, e.g. an executable has to deal with new deposits and old deposits at
  the same time. Another example may be economic constants.
- Additional, backwards compatible: new constants are introduced for later
  phases.
- Changing: there is a very small chance some constant may really be *replaced*.
  In this off-chance, it is likely better to include it as an additional
  variable, and some clients may simply stop supporting the old one if they do
  not want to sync from genesis. The change of functionality goes through a
  phase of deprecation of the old constant, and eventually only the new constant
  is kept around in the config (when old state is not supported anymore).

Based on these types of changes, we model the config as a list of key value
pairs, that only grows with every fork (they may change in development versions
of forks, however; git manages this). With this approach, configurations are
backwards compatible (older clients ignore unknown variables) and easy to
maintain.

### Test completeness

Tests should be independent of any sync-data. If one wants to run a test, the
input data should be available from the YAML. The aim is to provide clients with
a well-defined scope of work to run a particular set of test-suites.

- Clients that are complete are expected to contribute to testing, seeking for
  better resources to get conformance with the spec, and other clients.
- Clients that are not complete in functionality can choose to ignore suites
  that use certain test-runners, or specific handlers of these test-runners.
- Clients that are on older versions can test their work based on older releases
  of the generated tests, and catch up with newer releases when possible.

## Test structure

```
File path structure:
tests/<config name>/<fork or phase name>/<test runner name>/<test handler name>/<test suite name>/<test case>/<output part>
```

### `<config name>/`

Configs are upper level. Some clients want to run minimal first, and useful for
sanity checks during development too. As a top level dir, it is not duplicated,
and the used config can be copied right into this directory as reference.

### `<fork or phase name>/`

This would be: "phase0", "altair", etc. Each introduces new tests, and modifies
any tests that change: some tests of earlier forks repeat with updated state
data.

### `<test runner name>/`

The well known bls/shuffling/ssz_static/operations/epoch_processing/etc.
Handlers can change the format, but there is a general target to test.

### `<test handler name>/`

Specialization within category. All suites in here will have the same test case
format. Using a `handler` in a `runner` is optional. A `core` (or other generic)
handler may be used if the `runner` does not have different formats.

### `<test suite name>/`

Suites are split up. Suite size (i.e. the amount of tests) does not change the
maximum memory requirement, as test cases can be loaded one by one. This also
makes filtered sets of tests fast and easy to load.

### `<test case>/`

Cases are split up too. This enables diffing of parts of the test case, tracking
changes per part, while still using LFS. Also enables different formats for some
parts.

### `<output part>`

These files allow for custom formats for some parts of the test. E.g. something
encoded in SSZ. Or to avoid large files, the SSZ can be compressed with Snappy.
E.g. `pre.ssz_snappy`, `deposit.ssz_snappy`, `post.ssz_snappy`.

Diffing a `pre.ssz_snappy` and `post.ssz_snappy` provides all the information
for testing, when decompressed and decoded. Then the difference between pre and
post can be compared to anything that changes the pre state, e.g.
`deposit.ssz_snappy`

Note that by default, the SSZ data is in the given test case's
<fork or phase name> version, e.g., if it's `altair` test case, use
`altair.BeaconState` container to deserialize the given state.

YAML is generally used for test metadata, and for tests that do not use SSZ:
e.g. shuffling and BLS tests. In this case, there is no point in adding special
SSZ types. And the size and efficiency of YAML is acceptable.

#### Common output formats

Between all types of tests, a few formats are common:

- **`.yaml`**: A YAML file containing structured data to describe settings or
  test contents.
- **`.ssz`**: A file containing raw SSZ-encoded data. Previously widely used in
  tests, but replaced with compressed variant.
- **`.ssz_snappy`**: Like `.ssz`, but compressed with Snappy block compression.
  Snappy block compression is already applied to SSZ in consensus-layer gossip,
  available in client implementations, and thus chosen as compression method.

#### Special output parts

##### `meta.yaml`

If present (it is optional), the test is enhanced with extra data to describe
usage. Specialized data is described in the documentation of the specific test
format.

Common data is documented here:

Some test-case formats share some common key-value pair patterns, and these are
documented here:

```
bls_setting: int     -- optional, can have 3 different values:
                            0: (default, applies if key-value pair is absent). Free to choose either BLS ON or OFF.
                                 Tests are generated with valid BLS data in this case,
                                 but there is no change of outcome when running the test if BLS is ON or OFF.
                            1: known as "BLS required" - if the test validity is strictly dependent on BLS being ON
                            2: known as "BLS ignored"  - if the test validity is strictly dependent on BLS being OFF
```

##### `manifest.yaml`

Included in every test case. Contains metadata that identifies the test vector:

```yaml
preset: minimal      # Preset (mainnet, minimal, general)
fork: phase0         # Fork/phase name
runner: bls          # Test runner category
handler: eth_aggregate_pubkeys  # Specific handler
suite: bls           # Test suite name
case: eth_aggregate_pubkeys_valid_0  # Individual test case name
```

This metadata duplicates what is already encoded in the directory path:

```
tests/<preset>/<fork>/<runner>/<handler>/<suite>/<case>/
```

Having it in a file means test vectors can be moved or distributed without
losing context.

##### `config.yaml`

The runtime-configurables may be different for specific tests. When present,
this replaces the default runtime-config that comes with the otherwise
compile-time preset settings.

The format matches that of the `mainnet_config.yaml` and `minimal_config.yaml`,
see the [`/configs`](../../configs/README.md#format) documentation. Config
values that are introduced at a later fork may be omitted from tests of previous
forks.

## Config sourcing

The constants configurations are located in:

```
<specs repo root>/configs/<config name>.yaml
```

And copied by CI for testing purposes to:

```
<tests repo root>/tests/<config name>/<config name>.yaml
```

The first `<config name>` is a directory, which contains exactly all tests that
make use of the given config.

## Note for implementers

The basic pattern for test-suite loading and running is:

1. For a specific config, load it first (and only need to do so once), then
   continue with the tests defined in the config folder.
2. Select a fork. Repeat for each fork if running tests for multiple forks.
3. Select the category and specialization of interest (e.g.
   `operations > deposits`). Again, repeat for each if running all.
4. Select a test suite. Or repeat for each.
5. Select a test case. Or repeat for each.
6. Load the parts of the case. `manifest.yaml` and `meta.yaml` if present.
7. Run the test, as defined by the test format.

Step 1 may be a step with compile time selection of a configuration, if desired
for optimization. The base requirement is just to use the same set of constants,
independent of the loading process.
